Testing, this is an interview with Dr. John
Milleth. Today's date is Wednesday, March 5th,
1980. This is the second interview with Dr.
Milleth concerning the School of Veterinary
Medicine. This is Terry Anderson.
This is our second interview with Dr. John Miloff
on Wednesday, March 5, 1980, and the last time we
were discussing the years of the 1920s and the
1930s at Texas A&M. This time I'd like to bring it up
to date. In 1936 you were appointed instructor,
and then in 1938 you were appointed assistant
professors in the Department of Pathology. Could
you tell me what courses you taught? And what was
the teaching load back then? Well, I couldn't tell
you without looking in the catalog. But I was the
only one in veterinary pathology. And we had a
general pathology course and a special pathology
course.
And as I recall, there was a graduate course but in
those days it was not taught very often. Most of the
teaching back in those days was just for
veterinary students and they didn't go on for
graduate work very often. So in the main it
consisted of general and special path. That was
it. You remember the first time you gave a lecture
Yes. Could you relate that? I remember it very
distinctly, but this was not in veterinary
medicine. It was over in biology. Oh, really? Yes,
because I had been a graduate assistant two years
in biology in 1932.
When I had my first class, it was in the anatomy and
physiology for... physical ed students and
pre-med students. And as I told you the other day,
Dr. Kelsey in Houston and Bones Irvin, who was in
our athletic department for quite a few years,
were students. Same way with Dr. Mac Fattridge. So
I had several men there who later became MDs and
rather prominent people. So, luckily, the first
lecture, the first hour of class was only 30
minutes in those days. It was only 30 minutes? A
lecture was 30 minutes? The first hour. Oh, in the
morning. The first hour in the morning? No. The
first time the class met. Oh. You met for 30
minutes, just to more or less to find out about your
students and see that their cards were there, and
to assign a lesson, to name the textbook. It's more
of an introductory period. And from then on, it was
50 minutes? From then on, it was a 50-minute
period.
Luckily, it was only 30 minutes because my mouth
became so dry I could hardly
speak. My first class at Texas A&M. I had, I think it
was eight students in that group. It was a 300
course. And it was all my course at $45 a month. But
they didn't give you the introduction, the survey
course? The lower level course? They gave you an
upper level course the first time? No, I had 341,
342 biology. Four hour course, physiology and
anatomy. So it was all mine. I borrowed and bought a
few things. Dr. Ball gave me enough money to buy
some histology slides. I borrowed skeleton,
human skeleton bones from Galveston Medical
School. Just here, yonder, and elsewhere.
Physiology, but near physiology alone, a few
smoke drums, a few drum chemographs to smoke.
That's all we had. We went frog gigging at night,
caught frogs for nerve muscle preparations.
We had a good time. The students, well, Bones
Irving said, John, that's the best course I ever
had in my life. In general, you thought you were
pretty nervous? I was. My first class, I was rather
nervous, naturally.
Now, all this was before World War II. Do you
remember what you were doing on December 7, 1941?
Pearl Harbor. I can remember at noon on December
7th, we were having, Ruth and I were having lunch at
Miss Maggie Parker's in Bryan. With old Judge Nunn
from Crockett and Mrs. Bernice Claytor, who was in
the extension service at A&M. And the news came
over the radio that Pearl Harbor had been bombed. I
remember that very well. What was your reaction?
Well, my reaction was one of utter dismay because
we were told that the Pacific Fleet had been wiped
out and we didn't know what was to happen next.
How about your colleagues?
Well, they had the same reaction, but it wasn't
long before we settled down. We registered and so
on. I had to register for the draft, but I was
classified 4F because I had had tuberculosis and
so on. So I managed to stay on at A&M and teach. Well,
we had ASTP students. They were in the armed
forces, actually. And to begin with, then, Dr.
Rubin had a commission
in the armed services. So he had to leave. And I was
left alone. And from then on, I don't know how many
veterinary graduates we hired during World War
II. I thought it was a pity. since we were teaching
students who were in the armed services, why the
faculty was not put in armed services too. Because
we were kept busy trying to find someone to teach on
account of the fact that every time we got someone,
they were drafted. So it kept us in a turmoil all the
time. During the war, we were. In other words, you
wanted to have a commission then? Yes, I'd like to
have had a commission and to have been assigned to
teach. Oh, I see. And I think if we ever get into
another conflict, that's what they should do. I
can't see any reason why you have to keep searching
for someone to teach students who are in the
services. Because in the service, if they're
teaching, they're certainly in uniform. And
there was another thing, too. Our faculty members
were young people where they just graduated, more
than likely, and came right back into teaching
just as a gap between then and going into the
service, because they knew they were going to be
drafted.
They were in civilian clothes. And here in Bryan,
we had Bryan Air Force Base. And on weekdays or
weekends, the streets of Bryan were just filled
with men in uniform. And what do you think? Here's a
youngster goes down there. He's maybe 21, 22 years
old. And he's in civilian clothes. Yeah, what are
you doing in civilian clothes? Why aren't you in
uniform? Well, it was embarrassing to them. I've
had that related to me. You had it related while you
were here? Yeah. Could you give me an example? The
youngsters who went to town and were criticized
for not being in uniform. I've had them tell me that
they just didn't want to go to town, on Saturdays
especially. when the streets would be jammed with
men in from Bryan Air Force Base. So I think if we
ever get into another conflict, why, if we're
going to continue our college courses within,
staff members who are teaching should be in
uniform. That's the only thing to do. That's an
interesting point. Now. We had. The speed-up
program, as they called it in those days. What did
that stand for? You taught every course every
semester. Now, if you can, you just try to do that
and try to keep faculty, too. Yeah. Every course,
every semester.
So that's a choice. That went on for three years.
Every course, every semester. And so are there any
other ways in which, besides the speed up, are
there other ways in which the war affected the
school of medicine, do you think? Well, we had
trouble getting formaldehyde for embalming, and
we had trouble in obtaining alcohol. We had
trouble in obtaining almost anything.
Sometimes, well, I can recall that we paid as high
as, $15 a gallon for formaldehyde for embalming
animals. $15
a gallon. Of course, I don't know what it sells for
now, but that was a tremendous price to pay for it.
What did it cost normally? I don't recall now, but
it was much cheaper than that old $1.02 a gallon,
something like that. compared to that $15. But
there were people who would like to do a little
black marketing. Oh, really? Oh, yeah. Do you know
of any examples? Well, I'm not going to quote any
names, but I know one person who would like to have
sold me more formaldehyde. He had it, but he wanted
an exorbitant price for it. But I told him we'd just
do without. But in general, did you find much black
marketing during that time? No, I didn't. We had
trouble getting alcohol. Our alcohol, I don't
know whether it still does or not, but in those
days, it came from the state chemist, old Dr.
Fraps. Pardon me for the old. But Dr. Fraps was head
of the state chemistry lab then, and he was very
reluctant to give up the alcohol unless you had a
real need for it. And he put you through an
inquisition. If you went over there for a gallon or
two of alcohol, he asked you 1,001 questions. Mean
it? It was like an inquisition. Oh, really? I can
remember one person who was over in biology, went
there for alcohol. Dr. Frapps began with that
inquisition with him. Well, this person didn't
relish the idea of being interrogated so
intensely. So when Dr. Frapps asked him, what are
you going to do with this alcohol? He said, well,
Dr. Frapps, I'm going to take you down on the Brazos
River and get drunker than hell. Don't you want to
go along with me? They had him up on the carpet. He
had to visit the president's office. And he was
dressed down for being so insubordinate. That
type of a martyr. And there was another one who went
over there. He said, Dr. Fraps, I have heard quite a
bit about you on this campus. You old SOB. I don't
intend to sit here and undergo this
interrogation. Now, if you're going to give me the
alcohol, let's have it. If not, I'll be on my way.
Well, they had him up on the carpet, too. And
rightly so, he had no reason to say anything like
that to Dr. Frapps. Well, he learned a few things
from Dr. Frapps. I went over there one time with
some glass bottles. So at the end of the
interrogation, he asked me if I brought
containers for the alcohol. I said, yes, I have
some jugs. He said, are they crock? I said, no,
they're glass. He said, well, they're not jugs.
They're bottles. Jugs are made of crock. Thank you
very much, Dr. Frank.
And then you went upstairs. Old Dr. Asbury,
another one of the old timers on the campus, had
quite a character.
You had to take the requisition up to him to get the
alcohol. So he measured it. He measured it to the
cc. He had a 1,000 cc graduate cylinder. And he
poured the alcohol out of five gallon tins into
this graduate cylinder. He was rather nervous, so
he would spill quite a bit on the floor. Well, the
boss says we have to measure it to the CC, and he's
just sloshing it over. He's spilling about as much
as outside the cylinder is in it. But he was another
character. Were there other changes besides the
shortage of supply that you noticed during the
war?
No, I don't recall. I know we worked hard. What
about the number of students? We didn't have too
many students. The student groups fell off quite a
bit. But prior to the war, we had gotten up to a
goodly number of students. I don't know how many we
had. I'd have to go back and look at my old class roll
books to find out exactly the number. I guess those
old roll books are still in the anatomy
department. I left them there. They were supposed
to be part of the property of the college.
In those days, we had quite an influx of students
from New York. Why is that? They could go to school
cheaper in Texas than they could up there. And
Cornell evidently didn't want too many of them.
They required the student to have a year on the
farm. I don't know what else they required, but
that kept most of them out because they were from
Long Island and Hoboken. what have you, around New
York City, the Bronx. So we had a big influx of those
fellows for several years. Finally, the board of
directors ruled that we couldn't take any
out-of-state students except nine students from
Louisiana. And that's all. When was that about?
When did that change come about? Oh, I don't
recall, but it was way back in there in the 40s. So I
don't recall what year it was. Speaking of the 40s,
right after the war, there was this university,
and many universities in this country have
experienced a great period of growth. Well,
that's when our growth began. Yeah. Let's talk
about that. What do you think were the most
important changes?
Well, I think that the most important changes came
about in our curriculum. We began to look at our
curriculum more closely. Well, I would say that
from the late 30s on, our curriculum improved and
our teaching improved. In fact, I think that along
about
19 and 38, probably. From then till now, we've been
on a gradual improvement. Why do you say that? Why
would you pick out that period? Well, there was a
period in there from, I would say, the middle 20s on
up to about 38,
wherein the College of Veterinary Medicine
deteriorated. And as I can look back and see it, we
almost closed up.
In fact, when I started teaching in veterinary
medicine in 36, it was deplorable. We had nothing.
Supplies. No supplies. Nothing built up in a... In
a department where you're supposed to have a
beautiful slide library for histology and
embryology, or in pathology where you're
supposed to have, oh, examples of nearly all the
diseases and pathologic conditions in animals,
what do you have? Nothing. everything is rack and
ruin the old slides well when i went into pathology
in 36 there were a few old things there slides of
conditions diseases that dr francis and dr
marsteller had brought from ohio state with them
things that they had picked up along the way well
the stains had deteriorated They were cut too
thick. They were improperly prepared, and so on.
So all of that stuff, instead of trying to teach
with it, which was useless, I threw it out, just
threw it away, broke it up, put it in the trash, and
started from scratch. Well, why do you say that it
started to improve in about 39? Well, that's when
we actually, the improvement was enough that you
could see it by 38 or 39. To begin with, in 36 and 37,
you were striving with everything you had, all the
energy you were putting forth to building up a
slide collection. If you wanted to show a student a
section of liver, a liver cell, what did you have? A
picture and a book. And that's about the way it was.
And in pathology, in 35 or 34, when I took pathology
under Dr. Wharton, all he did was to give each
student, there were 16 students, he gave each one
of us five slides of diseased tissue.
And whenever you wrote the slides up, and turned
them in, you had finished your course in
pathology. That is the truth. So what pathology
did we have? All you did was to turn through a
pathology textbook and try to find something in
the way of an illustration in the book that looked
like what you had in this section that you were
looking at under a little old cheap microscope, if
you could find one that wasn't in use. They didn't
have but three or four microscopes. So
I would say that as far as pathology went, I had none
when I was studying in veterinary medicine. Now
this was 1934. He
had no collection of material. He had enough
material to put five slides in an envelope, and
when you have decided what these are, well, write
them up and turn it in, and I'll give you a grade on
it. We had no formal lectures.
We had no post-mortem material. He and Dr. Wharton
and Dr. Marsteller were at odds. And Dr.
Marsteller would see to it that nothing that died
ever went to pathology for an autopsy. Nothing.
And I can remember that we posted one old mule. And
that's all I saw in pathology. And I don't recall
now what was wrong with the old mule. He may have
died of colic or something. I don't know. So
actually, other than physiology, Dr. Burns was
giving a good course in physiology and a good
course in pharmacology and toxicology. His
department, I don't believe, ever fell down. But
the others did because Dr. Wharton taught 11
courses all by himself. Now, if you can teach all
the courses in pathology, all the courses in
bacteriology, including immunology, milk and
meat hygiene, sanitary,
classes in milk and meat inspection work, if you
can do all of that plus jurisprudence, 11 courses,
I believe, altogether that have been broken down
into three or four departments now with I don't
know how many people in each department. But here
was one man attempting to do all of that. Well, I
don't think his attempt went very far. I think he
gave up. And I believe that's the reason that he and
Dr. Marsteller were at odds. Well, that and other
things, too. The personal life of Dr. Horton was
something else. When he died in San Antonio, he had
been married nine times and divorced, I believe.
But he was... Nine times? Dr. Wharton was... Nine
times? Well, his father... How could any man
handle that? His father had been married and
divorced 11 times, so he wanted to break his
father's record. So he told me. Anyhow, I was his
graduate assistant, and very often, to show you
more about the teaching in those days, he might
come to me 10 minutes before class time and say i
have to go into town would you mind taking this next
class i said well what is it and he would say maybe uh
general pathology or something i said well what
were you going to talk about today well he said just
talk about anything you want to talk about because
i have got to go to town so Yeah, I am. I don't know
what he was going to talk about, if anything. So I
have about 10 minutes to get ready. So you know what
they had. Because at that time, I had had no
pathology to amount to anything. Yes, I had had
this course that he was supposed to give to the
students. But I don't know what he was going to do.
Ten minutes before class time. Here you go. What'd
you do? Well, you just take a book and more or less
read it out to them. And that's about something.
Why did he have to go to jail? So he would come. Well,
he was having trouble. He had had a divorce. And his
wife had been given custody of the two children.
And the sheriff was on him then. He was, I think
Wharton had the children down at his house. He had
taken them down there. And the sheriff was going to
go down there and get them. And Wharton says, well,
if you do, I'll meet you at the front gate. And
you're not going to get away alive. I'll kill you.
And he would have. I believe he would have. The
sheriff didn't show. I believe.
Well, anyway, I think that. But he didn't get along
with Marsteller. He and Dr. Moore. Well, I can see
that. Dr. Marsteller didn't want to put up with a
lot of foolishness. And the way things were going,
too, in the department.
Horton was a very independent person. I could talk
to you all day about Dr. Horton. But he, Dr. Horton,
actually was a brilliant person. He had a
photographic memory. He could take a textbook or
whatever you handed him and just turn page after
page and give it back to you word for word,
practically word for word. Or he would come into
class. This was back in, oh, long, about 19 and 30,
31, somewhere along. taking a course as an
elective. Dr. Wharton would come in, roll his Bull
Durham cigarette,
push his big black Stetson kind of over his shaggy
eyebrows, get his boots up on the table. There's
something in there. He'd been out in the cowlots.
You could tell he always wore cowboy boots and
never cleaned them. He'd roll that cigarette with
one hand and then strike the match with his thumb
nail and light a cigarette and then flip that match
way on over yonder somewhere and say, well, what do
you want to talk about this morning?
Well, someone said this morning that, They're
having an outbreak of anthrax in Louisiana. We
would like to know just exactly how you would
handle an outbreak of anthrax. So he would spend an
hour, and he would give you all of the government
regulations, how to handle an anthrax outbreak,
and so on, perfectly. Really? Absolutely
perfect. But there he is, you can see him with that
big black Stetson, pushed down over there and
smoking that bulldog cigarette, and talking to
the students. And his feet are up here on the table,
and he's in an old captain's chair or something
back there. But he would tell you, he knew.
But it really doesn't matter.